KEP-5963: DRA Device Compatibility Groups (#5964)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5963-device-compatibility-groups/README.md

  - e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
  - (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) within one minor version of promotion to GA
- (R) Production readiness review completed
- (R) Production readiness review approved
- "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website](https://git.k8s.io/website), for publication to [kubernetes.io](https://kubernetes.io/)
- Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

This KEP proposes an extension to the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) ResourceSlice API to

> support mutually exclusive device allocation constraints. Hardware devices often

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support mutually exclusive device allocation constraints between sets of devices. Hardware devices often
```

support multiple partitioning or virtualization schemes (for example, GPU MIG
slicing vs. MPS sharing) that provide different trade-offs in terms of isolation,
performance, and resource sharing. These schemes are frequently mutually exclusive
at the hardware level: once a physical device is partitioned or configured using
one scheme, it cannot be reconfigured to use a different scheme until all existing
allocations are released.

The current DRA Partitionable Devices API has no mechanism for drivers to express
these mutual exclusivity constraints. A shared counter with a capacity of one
can ensure mutual exclusion, but this cannot be used here: such a counter
would have to be decremented once when allocating the *first* device from a set
of compatible devices, not once for *each* device. This cannot be expressed
at the moment.

## Motivation

Hardware devices often support multiple partitioning or virtualization schemes
that are mutually exclusive at the hardware level. For example, an NVIDIA GPU
can be configured for MIG (Multi-Instance GPU) slicing or MPS (Multi-Process

> Service) sharing, but not both simultaneously on the same physical device.

Reviewer: This repeats what was said above, almost using the same words. I think you can remove the entire paragraph here.

Without a mechanism to express these constraints in DRA, the following problems
arise:

1. **Late Failure Detection**: Incompatible allocations are only detected during
  resource preparation, after scheduling decisions have already been made.
2. **Scheduler Unawareness**: The scheduler may allocate incompatible devices,
  leading to pod startup failures.
3. **Poor User Experience**: Users receive cryptic preparation failures instead
  of clear scheduling feedback.
4. **Resource Thrashing**: The scheduler may repeatedly attempt incompatible

>   allocations before giving up.

Reviewer: This point 4 sounds wrong to me: the scheduler doesn't know that a decision is wrong, so there are no repeated attempts and no "giving up".

Remove it?

Author: You are right, I combined pod controller + scheduler into "scheduler" - For Jobs for example, it would read like "The scheduler may repeatedly perform allocations that are incompatible at the device level for Job pods, before the Job controller gives up"

I'll rephrase this to emphasise the role of pod-controllers in this case as I think it is important to show

Author: I'll actually remove it as it is a more specific case of 3

The current workaround—having DRA drivers fail resource preparation when
incompatible allocations are attempted—is insufficient because it provides no

> mechanism to inform the scheduler, and does not prevent repeated failed attempts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mechanism to inform the scheduler, and does not prevent repeated failed attempts when a replacement pod gets created for a failed one.
```

### Goals

- Allow DRA drivers to specify compatibility between virtual devices within a
single physical device.
- Allow the scheduler to make informed allocation decisions that respect
compatibility rules declared in ResourceSlice objects.
- Provide a generic mechanism applicable to any hardware with partitioning
constraints, not just GPUs.

### Non-Goals

- Allowing DRA drivers to specify compatibility between devices that do not
  share a counter set. The scope of compatibility constraints is limited to
  virtual devices consuming from the same counter set (which typically
  represents a single underlying physical device).
- Providing a centralized or cluster-wide registry of compatibility group

>   names. Group names are opaque strings scoped to a single ResourceSlice pool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  names. Group names are opaque strings scoped to a single resource pool
```

  unchanged.

## Proposal

**CompatibilityGroups Assignment**

Add a `device.consumesCounters[].compatibilityGroups` field with type `[]string`. Devices declare which  
named groups they belong to. For two devices consuming counters from the same  
counter set to be allocated at the same time, they must share at least one compatibility group.

Devices with an empty `compatibilityGroups` field are compatible only with other devices in the same
counter set that have it empty. Existing ResourceSlices (where no device sets the
field) continue to behave as today; drivers adopting this feature need to annotate
every device sharing a counter set.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a GPU operator using NVIDIA GPUs, I want to express in my ResourceSlice
that MIG-partitioned virtual devices and MPS-sharing virtual devices on the
same physical GPU are mutually exclusive. When a pod requesting a MIG partition
is already running on a GPU, I want the scheduler to automatically exclude all
MPS devices on that same GPU from consideration for new allocations, rather than
allowing an allocation that will fail at device preparation time.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

> A candidate device is admitted only if its`compatibilityGroups` share at 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A candidate device is admitted only if its `compatibilityGroups` share at 
```

> least one entry with the **rollingintersection** of `compatibilityGroups` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
least one entry with the **rolling intersection** of `compatibilityGroups` 
```

Typo?

Reviewer: This term is introduced here without explaining further what is meant. It sounds like this refers to an implementation detail?

Perhaps simplify here and introduce it later?

I'm not sure whether the text here really fits under "Notes/Constraints/Caveats". That section typically calls out limitations of the proposal, but you describe here how it works.

You can delete sections if you have nothing to say there.

**Older schedulers ignoring devices with compatibilityGroups**

At alpha, if the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups` feature-gate is disabled, devices which present the `compatibilityGroups` field will be ignored by `kube-scheduler`.
This is in order to allow enablement of the feature without user intervention (pod deletion) when graduating to beta. 

**Drivers must be aware of the enablement status of the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups` flag**

The feature flag can be enabled/disabled at runtime. This requires drivers to identify the flag status and update the `ResourceSlice`s they manage accordingly.

## Design Details

### API

#### CompatibilityGroups Assignment

A new optional field `compatibilityGroups` is added inside each entry of
`device.consumesCounters[]`. It contains a list of string group names.
For two devices consuming counters from the same counter set to be allocated
together, either both must leave the field unset, or both
must declare the field and share at least one group name. A nil
`compatibilityGroups` and an empty `compatibilityGroups: []` are treated
identically. This means a device that declares the field is never allocated 

> on a shared counter at the same time with a sibling that omits it.

Reviewer: How does the scheduler know what groups some allocated device belongs to?

We discourage it, but a DRA driver might remove the definition of an allocated device from the ResourceSlice while it is still in use.

Other features like consumable capacity therefore copy all relevant information into the allocation result, then use that as source of truth. You should do the same.

Author: That's a great point, I'll rework this section.

The field is placed on each `consumesCounters[]` entry rather than on the
device itself because compatibility is a physical-hardware property scoped to
the shared resource represented by the counter set. A single virtual device
that consumes from multiple counter sets may therefore declare different
groups per counter set, reflecting different exclusivity constraints on
different pieces of underlying hardware. Two devices that do not share any
counter set are never compared via this field, even if they live on the same
node or in the same `ResourceSlice`.

**Naming convention used in examples.** A device's `compatibilityGroups`
lists the groups it agrees to be allocated alongside other devices in.
Group names in the examples are chosen for readability (e.g., `mig`,
`mps`, `foobar`) and hint at which devices agree to be in the group;
the scheduler does not parse them, so any opaque strings will do as
long as compatible devices declare a common group.

### Examples

The following examples demonstrate the problem and the proposed solution using
a GPU that supports two mutually exclusive partitioning schemes: MIG (hardware

> partitioning into isolated instances) and MPS (software-level time-sharing).

Reviewer 2: Questions:
- I thought you could use MPS or time slicing on top of MIG partitions?
- Do you have a pointer to how you plan to model MPS in the resource slice, and how that relates to counterSets? I thought MPS was configured at claim time. Or are you looking at some sort of system-mediated MPS?

---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: node-1-gpu-0-devices
spec:
  driver: gpu.example.com
  pool:
    name: node-1-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  nodeName: node-1
  devices:
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-0
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-1
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-2
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"
```

ResourceClaims — two pods each requesting a MIG 1g partition:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: pod-a-gpu
  namespace: default
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
      - name: gpu
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: >-

>                 device.driver == 'gpu.example.com' &&

Reviewer 2: you can simplify this a little by creating a gpu.example.com DeviceClass or maybe even a mig-1g.example.com DeviceClass.

no way to express that these schemes cannot coexist.

ResourceSlices — the same GPU now advertising both MIG and MPS devices:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: node-1-gpu-0-counters
spec:
  driver: gpu.example.com
  pool:
    name: node-1-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  sharedCounters:
    - name: gpu-0-counters
      counters:
        multiprocessors:
          value: "100"
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: node-1-gpu-0-devices
spec:
  driver: gpu.example.com
  pool:
    name: node-1-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  nodeName: node-1
  devices:
    # MIG partitions
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-0
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-1
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"

>     # MPS shares

Reviewer 2: I am not super familiar with MPS, but from my crude understanding, I would think these would be workload-demand driven rather than statically declared by the driver. Do you really expect MPS shares to be published by the driver? Are they that static? Couldn't you form them from the RC, maybe using something like the scheme to map requests -> countersets in #5941?

Author: This is a great point.

It is possible to create MPS from a RC, but there is also a use case to statically publish them by the driver.
I think I will update the KEP to include MIG and vGPUs and drop MPS to avoid this confusion.

The vGPU use case is similar to MIG in the sense that there are pre-defined partitioning schemes to both.

Reviewer 2: AIUI, vGPU is done at the vmm layer, below K8s. That would be cool if we could do it in K8s too.

            multiprocessors:
              value: "50"
```

ResourceClaims — pod-a requests a MIG partition, pod-b requests an MPS share:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: pod-a-gpu
  namespace: default
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
      - name: gpu
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: >-
                device.driver == 'gpu.example.com' &&
                device.attributes['type'].string == 'mig-1g'
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: pod-b-gpu
  namespace: default
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
      - name: gpu
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: >-
                device.driver == 'gpu.example.com' &&
                device.attributes['type'].string == 'mps'
```

The scheduler sees `gpu-0-mig-1g-0` (20 SMs) and `gpu-0-mps-0` (50 SMs).
Total: 70 <= 100 — the counter capacity check passes. The scheduler allocates
both. But at preparation time, the driver fails because MIG and MPS cannot be
active simultaneously on the same physical GPU. Pod-b gets a cryptic
preparation error. The scheduler may retry the same incompatible combination

> repeatedly, causing resource thrashing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
preparation error.
```

Let's leave out the scheduler. It's not correct that it retries unless something changes and we don't need to go into all that here.

    # bar partitions
    - name: device-0-bar-0
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "bar"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: device-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:
            - bar
            - foobar
          counters:
            units:
              value: "25"
    # baz partitions
    - name: device-0-baz-0
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "baz"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: device-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:
            - baz
          counters:
            units:
              value: "50"
```

`device-0-foo-0` (groups: `foo`, `foobar`) and `device-0-bar-0` (groups:
`bar`, `foobar`) share the `foobar` group, so they can be allocated together.
`device-0-baz-0` (groups: `baz`) shares no group with either, so it cannot be
allocated with them.

For instance, if pod-a is allocated `device-0-foo-0`, a subsequent pod
requesting `device-0-bar-0` succeeds (both share `foobar`), but a pod
requesting `device-0-baz-0` is rejected (`foo`/`foobar` vs `baz` — no shared
group).

### Scheduler Changes

The DRA scheduler plugin is enhanced to:

1. For each candidate device during allocation:

> 2. Calculate rolling intersection of `compatibilityGroups` of already allocated devices

Reviewer: How is this "rolling"? I was expecting some kind of mechanism that keeps the intersection up-to-date as devices get allocated and allocations get rolled back.

If that is what meant, then it is not done "for each candidate device".

Reviewer: Also, how  many of these "rolling intersections" need to be calculated or kept up-to-date?

3. If the intersection of *2* and the `compatibilityGroups` of the candidate is empty, skip the device for this allocation, otherwise, continue with allocation attempt.   

**Complexity.** Let *M* be the number of devices already allocated on a
counter set at the start of a scheduling round, *N* the number of candidates
considered during the round on that counter set, and *G* the maximum number
of groups declared per counter-set consumption entry. The scheduler
maintains a **rolling intersection** of `compatibilityGroups` over the
allocated set on the counter set: it is initialized from the *M* pre-existing
devices in O(*M* · *G*), checked against each candidate's groups in O(*G*),
and updated in O(*G*) each time a candidate is admitted within the round.
The additional filter cost per scheduling cycle is therefore O((*M* + *N*) ·
*G*), with typical *G* ≤ 4 (hardware partition modes per device are small in
practice). The existing DRA allocation loop already iterates over candidates
per counter set, so the new work is a constant-factor-per-candidate addition

> rather than a new outer loop.

Reviewer: Note to self: I skipped this section because of my earlier question.

which depend on the feature. Eventually, the downgraded DRA driver will remove those
devices.

Allocated devices that leveraged this new field will remain allocated, and future allocations will not take `compatibilityGroups` into consideration.

### Version Skew Strategy

The feature introduces a new optional field on `ResourceSlice` and new
enforcement logic in the scheduler. Both `kube-apiserver` and
`kube-scheduler` can be running an old version (which doesn't know the
field), a new version with the feature gate disabled, or a new version
with the feature gate enabled. The table below summarises the behaviour
for every combination on a single cluster.

| kube-apiserver ↓ \ kube-scheduler → | old | new, gate off | new, gate on |
|---|---|---|---|
| **old**           | Pre-KEP      | Pre-KEP          | Pre-KEP          |
| **new, gate off** | Pre-KEP      | Pre-KEP          | Pre-KEP          |
| **new, gate on**  | Driver-only  | Devices skipped  | **Full feature** |

- **Pre-KEP.** The apiserver does not serve `compatibilityGroups` (it
  either doesn't know the field, or has the gate off, in which case it

>   strips on writes and hides on reads). The scheduler sees no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  strips on writes). The scheduler sees no
```

  field and allocates without considering it. Pods may be scheduled
  with incompatible devices; the DRA driver rejects them at preparation
  time.
- **Devices skipped.** The apiserver serves `compatibilityGroups`, and
  a new scheduler with the gate off recognises the field but is not
  permitted to enforce it. To avoid allocations it cannot validate, the
  scheduler excludes any device that declares `compatibilityGroups`
  from consideration. Devices that do not declare the field are
  scheduled normally.
- **Full feature.** The scheduler filters incompatible candidates
  during allocation. Drivers continue to validate at preparation time
  for defense in depth.

**Mixed-version HA kube-scheduler.** Replicas may temporarily operate
in different cells of the table (e.g., during a rolling restart or a
gate flip). If some replicas don't enforce and others do, the
non-enforcing replicas may allow allocations the enforcing replicas
would reject; if some replicas skip declared devices, those behave more
conservatively than the enforcing replicas. In all cases the worst-case
outcome is a driver-side rejection at preparation time; no incorrect

> allocations result. Resolution is to complete the rollout.

Reviewer: We don't support HA kube-scheduler where both are active at the same time.  It has to be a singleton because each instance assumes that it owns the resources on the nodes and the DRA devices.

I think you can remove this section.

**Downgrade with in-flight allocations.** Devices already allocated
under the new rules remain allocated across a downgrade; the
post-downgrade scheduler will not consider `compatibilityGroups` for
future allocations, reverting to pre-KEP behavior. No existing
allocations are invalidated.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- Feature gate
  - Feature gate name: DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-scheduler, kube-apiserver
- Gate behavior per component:
  - **kube-apiserver**: When enabled, persists `compatibilityGroups` to devices in `ResourceSlice`s.
    When disabled, strips `compatibilityGroups` on writes.
  - **kube-scheduler**: When enabled, respects `compatibilityGroups` declared by devices in `ResourceSlice`s.
    When disabled, skips devices that declare `compatibilityGroups`.

> - No control-plane downtime is required to toggle the gate.

Reviewer: Well, components must be restarted and the scheduler is a singleton. It's not the full control plane, but still there's some downtime.

binaries does not disturb existing pod/device bindings.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?
Rollback should be informed by an unexpected rise in scheduling failures of
pods that use DRA devices, surfaced via scheduling events emitted when
candidates are rejected due to compatibility constraints (see Monitoring →
How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their
instance?). A sudden uptick in such events after a driver update is a
likely signal of an incorrect compatibility matrix — see Risks → Incorrect
driver declarations.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?
Upgrade → downgrade → upgrade will be covered by the integration test
described in Test Plan → Integration tests. At alpha, manual verification on a
kind cluster with the feature gate flipped is acceptable; CI coverage is a
Beta graduation criterion.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?
No

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

> This feature is not intended for use by workload usage, it is intended for DRA Drivers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is not intended for use by workload usage, it is intended for DRA Drivers. Workloads use it indirectly when they allocate devices which use the feature, which is visible in the allocation result.
```

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- Events
  - Scheduling events:
    - When a candidate device is filtered out because its compatibility groups
      do not intersect those of an already-allocated device on the same
      counter set, the scheduler logs a per-node filter reason of the form:
      ```

>       device gpu-0-mps-0 (groups [mps]) incompatible with allocated device gpu-0-mig-1g-0 (groups [mig]) on counterSet gpu-0-counters

Reviewer: Does it really?

      ```
    - If no node has any allocatable candidate, the standard scheduler
      "0/N nodes are available" event aggregates this reason across nodes

>       (e.g., `4 Insufficient compatible DRA devices`).

Reviewer: Same here.

- Pod.status
  - Condition name: Unschedulable

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?
N/A

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?
N/A — this feature does not introduce new SLIs. Operators can observe
scheduling events for compatibility-based filter reasons to determine

> whether compatibility filtering is contributing to scheduling failures.

Reviewer: And here.

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?
None planned. Observability is provided through scheduling events emitted
by kube-scheduler when candidates are rejected due to compatibility

> constraints (see Monitoring → How can someone using this feature know that

Reviewer: And here.

combination.

### Inverted naming: `mutualExclusionGroups`

An alternative API would invert the semantics: instead of declaring which
groups a device *belongs to* (co-allocation predicate), declare which groups
a device is *incompatible with* (exclusion predicate). Two devices would then
be co-allocatable if and only if the intersection of their exclusion sets and
their own group memberships is empty.

The inverted model is arguably more intuitive for the motivating case — a MIG
device "excludes MPS," full stop — and does not require drivers to list each
peer group in their own entry (as Example 4 does, where `foo` devices must
include `bar` in their group list). It was rejected because:

- The co-allocation framing composes naturally with the existing DRA model,
  where counter-set membership already expresses "can share resources." A
  group is a finer-grained membership within the same model.
- Exclusion semantics require two fields to express the same information (the
  groups you *are* in, and the groups you *exclude*), or a global registry of
  group names. Membership-only is simpler.
- Symmetry is easier to validate: a driver that forgets to include `foo` in a

>   `bar` device's groups produces a diagnosable allocation failure, rather

Reviewer: ... except that we don't have good diagnostics.

- Upgrade → downgrade → upgrade: allocations made during the "upgrade" phase
  remain valid after downgrade; re-enabling enforcement does not re-evaluate
  existing allocations (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/test/e2e_dra/upgradedowngrade_test.go#L234-L287).

##### e2e tests

- Fake DRA driver advertising two mutually exclusive groups (`mig`, `mps`) on
  a single counter set. Scheduling a `mig` pod followed by an `mps` pod on
  the same node leaves the second pod Unschedulable with the documented
  event; reversing the order reproduces the behavior symmetrically.
- Same driver with devices who are compatible with each other (declare a shared group) — both pods schedule.

### Graduation Criteria
#### Alpha
- API defined and implemented
- All relevant code is merged and placed behind a feature flag
- Unit, integration and E2E tests implemented and passing reliably
- Driver-author documentation published under `kubernetes/website` (DRA
  drivers section), including the strict nil-matching rule and a worked
  MIG/MPS example.

#### Beta
- Validated with at least one production DRA driver (out-of-tree testing)

#### GA

> - At least 2 releases as beta

Reviewer 3: This is inconsistent with the milestone in kep.yaml

Author: Fixed

1. Maintain a cache of allocated devices per node, including their compatibility
  fields (`compatibilityGroups` values).
2. For each candidate device during allocation, evaluate whether it is compatible
  with all currently allocated devices on the node, and whether all allocated
   devices are compatible with it (bidirectional check).
3. Remove candidate devices from consideration if they violate compatibility
  constraints.
4. Emit clear scheduling events when a device is rejected due to compatibility.

**Complexity.** Let *M* be the number of devices already allocated on a
counter set, *N* the number of candidates under consideration for that
counter set, and *G* the maximum number of groups declared per counter-set
consumption entry. The additional filter cost per scheduling cycle is
O(*N* · *M* · *G*) for pairwise group-intersection checks, with typical *G*
≤ 4 (hardware partition modes per device are small in practice). The
existing DRA allocation loop already iterates over candidates per counter
set, so the new work is a constant-factor-per-candidate addition rather than
a new outer loop.

### Interaction with Multi-Request Claims and Device Constraints

> **Multiple requests within one claim.** The compatibility predicate is

Reviewer 3: Similar to the comment above, I feel that tracking which groups have already been used would be more efficient. For example, if two devices are allocated—device-1 with groups A, B, and device-2 with groups A, C—we can find the valid group (A) by performing an intersection. If we then try to allocate device-3 with groups A, D, we know it's valid because the intersection is not empty. This approach means we don't have to check all allocated devices for every device in a claim.

the same claim, a different claim on the same pod, or a different pod entirely.
Two devices within a single `ResourceClaim` that land on the same counter set
are therefore subject to the same pairwise check: the second request sees the
first as already-allocated state.

**Allocation order.** The scheduler does not reorder requests within a claim
to improve feasibility. If requests are ordered such that an early compatible
pick later blocks a mandatory pick, the claim becomes Unschedulable and
standard retry behavior applies. This matches how existing DRA constraints
behave.

**Composition with `DeviceConstraints`.** `compatibilityGroups` is a
driver-authored, ResourceSlice-side constraint. `DeviceConstraints` (e.g.,
`matchAttribute`) is a user-authored, ResourceClaim-side constraint. The two
are evaluated independently and both must pass for a candidate to be
allocated. A claim can never *relax* a driver-declared compatibility group,
and a driver can never *force* a claim-side `matchAttribute`. They compose by
conjunction.

### Driver Responsibilities

Resource drivers are responsible for:

1. Populating `compatibilityGroups` for all devices with compatibility requirements.

> 2. Ensuring compatibility rules are symmetric and consistent across all devices

Reviewer 3: What does "Ensuring compatibility rules are symmetric" exactly mean?

Author: It's basically a rephrasing of point 1, I'll remove it.

- (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
  - e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
  - (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) within one minor version of promotion to GA
- (R) Production readiness review completed
- (R) Production readiness review approved
- "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website](https://git.k8s.io/website), for publication to [kubernetes.io](https://kubernetes.io/)
- Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

> This KEP proposes an extension to the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) API to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This KEP proposes an extension to the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) ResourceSlice API to
```

support multiple partitioning or virtualization schemes (for example, GPU MIG
slicing vs. MPS sharing) that provide different trade-offs in terms of isolation,
performance, and resource sharing. These schemes are frequently mutually exclusive
at the hardware level: once a physical device is partitioned or configured using
one scheme, it cannot be reconfigured to use a different scheme until all existing
allocations are released.

The current DRA Partitionable Devices API has no mechanism for drivers to express
these mutual exclusivity constraints. A shared counter with a capacity of one
can ensure mutual exclusion, but this cannot be used here: such a counter
would have to be decremented once when allocating the *first* device from a set
of compatible devices, not once for *each* device. This cannot be expressed
at the moment.

Without a mechanism for this, incompatible allocations are only
detected during resource preparation, after the scheduler has already made its
decisions, leading to pod startup failures and resource thrashing. This KEP
introduces API and scheduler changes so that compatibility constraints can be

> declared in ResourceSlice objects and enforced at scheduling time.

Reviewer: I think you can remove this entire paragraph from the summary, making it shorter. The immediate next section repeats this.

Without a mechanism to express these constraints in DRA, the following problems
arise:

1. **Late Failure Detection**: Incompatible allocations are only detected during
  resource preparation, after scheduling decisions have already been made.
2. **Scheduler Unawareness**: The scheduler may allocate incompatible devices,
  leading to pod startup failures.
3. **Poor User Experience**: Users receive cryptic preparation failures instead
  of clear scheduling feedback.
4. **Resource Thrashing**: The scheduler may repeatedly attempt incompatible
  allocations before giving up.

The current workaround—having DRA drivers fail resource preparation when
incompatible allocations are attempted—is insufficient because it provides no
mechanism to inform the scheduler, and does not prevent repeated failed attempts.

### Goals

- Allow DRA drivers to specify compatibility between virtual devices within a
single physical device.
- Allow the scheduler to make informed allocation decisions that respect
compatibility rules declared in ResourceSlice objects.
- Provide a generic mechanism applicable to any hardware with partitioning
constraints, not just GPUs.

> - Maintain backward compatibility with existing ResourceSlice specifications.

Reviewer: It's not wrong to call this out explicitly, but it kind of goes without saying that adding a new feature must not break a v1 API... 😄

### Non-Goals

- Allowing DRA drivers to specify compatibility between devices that do not
  share a counter set. The scope of compatibility constraints is limited to

>   virtual devices consuming from the same counter set (which, by convention,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  virtual devices consuming from the same counter set (which typically
```

  represents a single underlying physical device).
- Providing a centralized or cluster-wide registry of compatibility group
  names. Group names are opaque strings scoped to a single ResourceSlice pool
  and are meaningful only to the driver that publishes them.
- Enabling the scheduler to *reconfigure* a physical device between
  partitioning schemes (e.g., MIG ↔ MPS) as part of scheduling. This KEP only
  addresses rejecting incompatible allocations; transitions between schemes
  remain a driver concern and typically require draining existing allocations.
- Expressing compatibility constraints on `ResourceClaim` objects. The field
  is driver-authored and lives only on `ResourceSlice`.
- Replacing existing counter-capacity checks. `compatibilityGroups` is an
  additional predicate; capacity math on `sharedCounters` continues to apply
  unchanged.

## Proposal

**CompatibilityGroups Assignment**

> Add a `device.consumesCounters[].compatibilityGroups` field. Devices declare which  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `device.consumesCounters[].compatibilityGroups` field with type `[]string`. Devices declare which  
```

> Add a `device.consumesCounters[].compatibilityGroups` field. Devices declare which  

Reviewer: Shadow API review: one thing which needs to be sorted out, either now or during implementation: how much larger does a ResourceSlice become if populating each `device.consumesCounters[]` with the maximum number of strings, each with maximum length?

We recently decided to limit the number of devices per ResourceSlice to a smaller value if any advanced feature is used:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/staging/src/k8s.io/api/resource/v1/types.go#L287-L292

You would need to add this feature to that list. Then also extend https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/test/integration/dra/objects.go#L33-L43 (needs to be mentioned below under "Integration tests").

Author: I agree, I will attempt to address that as accurately as possible here instead of leaving it for the implementation.

Is there a formula that resulted in that limit, or is it an arbitrary limit that was assumed safe enough to apply?

Reviewer: > I agree, I will attempt to address that as accurately as possible here instead of leaving it for the implementation.

This is hard to predict without an implementation of the API, so either just mention the rough approach here in the KEP or do a POC and then document the results of that POC.

> Is there a formula that resulted in that limit, or is it an arbitrary limit that was assumed safe enough to apply?

The default etcd size limit is around 1MB. The test link to above determines the protobuf encoding size, which needs to be less than that.

named groups they belong to. For two devices consuming counters from the same  

> counter set to be co-allocated, they must share at least one compatibility group.

Reviewer: Immediate questions, maybe answered later:
- Why `[]string` and not `*string`?
- If `[]string`, why *one* compatibility group and not *all*?

This probably cannot be answered here, so for impatient readers like yours truly it could help to say "As shown below, this semantic satisfies the use cases while simpler alternatives don't."

Then under "Alternatives" show what doesn't work, if it's not obvious from examples.

Author: That's because I wanted to allow for a case where:
- Devices of type A and B are compatible with each other
- Devices of type B and C are compatible with each other
- Devices of type A and C are incompatible with each other

The compatibility groups of each would look like:
- A: [AB]
- B: [AB, BC]
- C: [BC]

Then assuming devices of types A and B are allocated to a counterSet, an incoming device of type C will be rejected by device A on that counterSet, but would still be allocatable alongside devices of type B on a freshly allocated counterSet.

If A,B,C were all compatible with each other, then they would all declare the ABC group.

I would love to hear your opinion on such a use case

> counter set to be co-allocated, they must share at least one compatibility group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
counter set to be allocated at the same time, they must share at least one compatibility group.
```

Just a nit. "Co-allocated" is not a term that's used anywhere else.

As you have used it consistently in this document and want to keep using it, then you can define it here as "allocated at the same time (= co-allocated)".

Devices that omit this field are compatible only with other devices in the same

> counter set that also omit it. Existing ResourceSlices (where no device sets the

Reviewer: "Omit" implies some action, but devices don't act on this field.

```suggestion
Devices with an empty `compatibilityGroups` field empty are compatible only with other devices in the same
counter set that have it empty. Existing ResourceSlices (where no device sets the
```

> field) continue to behave as today; drivers adopting this feature should annotate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field) continue to behave as today; drivers adopting this feature need to annotate
```

every device sharing a counter set.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a GPU operator using NVIDIA GPUs, I want to express in my ResourceSlice
that MIG-partitioned virtual devices and MPS-sharing virtual devices on the
same physical GPU are mutually exclusive. When a pod requesting a MIG partition
is already running on a GPU, I want the scheduler to automatically exclude all
MPS devices on that same GPU from consideration for new allocations, rather than
allowing an allocation that will fail at device preparation time.

#### Story 2

As a hardware vendor publishing DRA drivers for an accelerator that supports
multiple exclusive operating modes (for example, exclusive mode, software
partitioning, and hardware partitioning), I want to declare the compatibility
constraints directly in my ResourceSlice, so that the Kubernetes scheduler
can enforce those constraints without requiring my driver to fail pod startup

> with cryptic error messages.

Reviewer: How is this second story different from the first? The only difference seems to be that it's more abstract. IMHO one specific story is sufficient.

Author: You are right, the second is just an abstracted version of the first, which would you suggest to keep? The abstract or the concrete?

Reviewer: The concrete.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

The compatibility relation is **symmetric**: if A can be co-allocated with B,

> then B can be co-allocated with A. It is **not transitive**: A and B sharing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compatibility relation is **symmetric**: if A can be allocated together with B,
then B can be together with A. It is **not transitive**: A and B sharing a
```

group, and B and C sharing a group, does not imply A and C share one.
Concretely, the scheduler evaluates the pairwise predicate
`groups(A) ∩ groups(B) ≠ ∅` against every already-allocated device on the same
counter set; it does not compute transitive closures. Drivers that want three
device types to be mutually co-allocatable must ensure every pair shares at
least one group (see Example 4).

### Risks and Mitigations

**Scheduler performance impact**: Evaluating compatibility constraints during  
device selection adds work to each scheduling cycle that involves DRA devices.

**Older schedulers ignoring new field**: A kube-scheduler that does not  
understand `compatibilityGroups` will ignore this  
field and may allocate incompatible devices. This degrades to the current  
behavior (driver fails at preparation time). Mitigation: document the version  
skew behavior clearly; drivers must still validate at preparation time even  

> when the scheduler enforces constraints.

Reviewer: Let's handle this a bit better:
- At alpha, add a check for the new field if the feature gate is off. If the field is non-empty, ignore the device.
- Then at the alpha->beta transition, enabling the feature in the kube-apiserver 1.38 is fine because kube-scheduler 1.37 will not do something that requires user intervention.

Introducing this in release 1.37 still has the problem, but that's acceptable because it's alpha.

Another mitigation (please add here) is that drivers must detect the dropped field when publishing ResourceSlices (happens when running on Kubernetes < 1.37 or on >= 1.37 with the feature disabled) and then fail. The driver must be reconfigured to not use the feature.

See https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/resourceslice/resourceslicecontroller.go#L327-L371 for the implementation part.

**Incorrect driver declarations**: If a driver declares incorrect compatibility

> constraints, the scheduler may either reject valid allocations or permit invalid

Reviewer: How is "incorrect" defined here? "Incorrect" in the sense that the ResourceSlice does not accurately describe the hardware, or "incorrect" in the sense of "invalid" = "violating the API definition"?

Validation in the API server can only validate a single ResourceSlice. With devices potentially scattered across different ResourceSlices, we cannot validate all API constraints. A mitigation for that is to validate in our helper code, see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/resourceslice/validation.go#L26-L38.

Mention that here if that is what is meant.

Author: I meant in the sense that ResourceSlices do not accurately describe the hardware.
I see now how it is redundant, I'll remove it

ones. Mitigation: the API is driver-authored and opt-in; drivers are responsible
for correctness and documentation of their compatibility matrix.

## Design Details

### API

#### CompatibilityGroups Assignment

A new field `compatibilityGroups` is added inside each entry of
`device.consumesCounters[]`. It contains a list of string group names.
For two devices consuming counters from the same counter set to be allocated

> together, either both must omit the field (or set it to an empty list), or both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
together, either both must leave the field unset, or both
```

Let's avoid the ambiguity and make the empty list invalid. We don't want two different ways in the API to express the same thing. Go clients would only be able to send an empty list anyway if we were to not use `omitempty`, and we should use that.

Validation then checks with `!= nil`. All other consumers can use `len()` or simply treat the list as a set because nil is implicitly the empty set. In other words, write that code as it's meant to be understood, ignoring the subtle `nil != []string{}` difference. Only validation needs to care about that.

          value: "152"
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
spec:
  driver: gpu.example.com
  pool:
    name: node-1-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  nodeName: node-1
  devices:
    - name: gpu-1-mig1
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-1-cs
          compatibilityGroups:
            - mig
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "2"
    - name: gpu-1-foo-part
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-1-cs
          compatibilityGroups:
            - foo
            - foobar
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "17"
    - name: gpu-1-bar-part
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-1-cs
          compatibilityGroups:
            - bar
            - foobar
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "17"
```

- `gpu-1-mig1` (groups: `mig`) and `gpu-1-foo-part` (groups: `foo`, `foobar`)
share no compatibility group, so they cannot be co-allocated on the same
counter set.
- `gpu-1-foo-part` (groups: `foo`, `foobar`) and `gpu-1-bar-part` (groups:
`bar`, `foobar`) share the `foobar` group, so they can be co-allocated on the

> same counter set.

Reviewer: What is the `T` from the "A device of type `T` lists `T` in its groups." naming convention and what is `t1t2`? Explicitly saying that would make it easier to map. I think it's: "mig" and "foobar" are device types `T` - but then how do "bar" and "foo" fit into the naming convention?

As "mig" is already not a made up word, can you make the other devices also use a real name, presumable "mps"?

Perhaps drop this fake example and only keep the one in the next section? They seem very similar.

Author: `mig`, `foo`, and `bar` are `T`'s and `foobar` is a composite group of `t1t2`.
I'll remove it, I'll keep only concrete examples in the doc

metadata:
  name: node-1-gpu-0-devices
spec:
  driver: gpu.example.com
  pool:
    name: node-1-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  nodeName: node-1
  devices:
    # MIG partitions
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-0
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:
            - mig
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"
    - name: gpu-0-mig-1g-1
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mig-1g"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:
            - mig
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "20"
    # MPS shares
    - name: gpu-0-mps-0
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mps"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:
            - mps
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "50"
    - name: gpu-0-mps-1
      attributes:
        type:
          string: "mps"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:

>             - mps

Reviewer: Same problem here: what is `t1t2` in this example?

Author: `mps` is `T` in this example, but since it is not compatible with anything else, it does not declare any `t1t2` composite group

          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "50"
```

ResourceClaims — identical to Example 2:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: pod-a-gpu
  namespace: default
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
      - name: gpu
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: >-
                device.driver == 'gpu.example.com' &&
                device.attributes['type'].string == 'mig-1g'
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: pod-b-gpu
  namespace: default
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
      - name: gpu
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: >-
                device.driver == 'gpu.example.com' &&
                device.attributes['type'].string == 'mps'
```

The scheduler allocates `gpu-0-mig-1g-0` (group: `mig`) to pod-a. When
evaluating `gpu-0-mps-0` (group: `mps`) for pod-b, it checks
compatibility: both devices consume from `gpu-0-counters`, but they share no
compatibility group (`mig` vs `mps`). The scheduler rejects the allocation and
pod-b becomes Unschedulable with event: "claim violates device compatibility

> constraints". No cryptic preparation failure, no resource thrashing.

Reviewer: You made this event up, didn't you? I'd rather expect the usual "cannot allocate all claims".

Exposing to the user why some allocation isn't possible isn't easy. This is not specific to this KEP.

Author: Yes, I made it up. If the "cannot allocate all claims" message is the standard across all allocation failure reasons, I'm OK with that.
I'll remove it.

Two MIG devices (both group: `mig`) or two MPS devices (both group: `mps`) can
still be co-allocated, since they share a group. Each device lists only its
own type because MIG and MPS are not compatible with each other; if they

> were, they would also share a composite group like `migmps`.

Reviewer: I'm still not sure whether I fully understand this "composite group" concept - maybe replies to my questions above will make it clearer.

Author: Let me know if the above explanations are still not clear

#### Example 4: Multiple compatible groups with an incompatible group

A device may support more than two partitioning schemes, some of which can
coexist. In this example, a device advertises three partition types: `foo`,
`bar`, and `baz`. `foo` and `bar` can coexist on the same device, but `baz`

> is incompatible with both.

Reviewer: Is there a reasonable chance that someone really needs this or did you include this just in case?

Author: I included it for future compatibility.
I don't have a concrete use case for it, but since the proposed API supports it, I added it here as a generic example.

        type:
          string: "baz"
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: device-0-counters
          compatibilityGroups:
            - baz
          counters:
            units:
              value: "50"
```

`device-0-foo-0` (groups: `foo`, `foobar`) and `device-0-bar-0` (groups:
`bar`, `foobar`) share the `foobar` group, so they can be co-allocated.
`device-0-baz-0` (groups: `baz`) shares no group with either, so it cannot be
co-allocated with them.

For instance, if pod-a is allocated `device-0-foo-0`, a subsequent pod
requesting `device-0-bar-0` succeeds (both share `foobar`), but a pod
requesting `device-0-baz-0` is rejected (`foo`/`foobar` vs `baz` — no shared
group).

### Scheduler Changes

The DRA scheduler plugin is enhanced to:

1. Maintain a cache of allocated devices per node, including their compatibility
  fields (`compatibilityGroups` values).
2. For each candidate device during allocation, evaluate whether it is compatible
  with all currently allocated devices on the node, and whether all allocated
   devices are compatible with it (bidirectional check).
3. Remove candidate devices from consideration if they violate compatibility
  constraints.

> 4. Emit clear scheduling events when a device is rejected due to compatibility.

Reviewer: I suspect that doing a prototype implementation will show that this is a bit different in practice. I'm skipping this for now.

are therefore subject to the same pairwise check: the second request sees the
first as already-allocated state.

**Allocation order.** The scheduler does not reorder requests within a claim
to improve feasibility. If requests are ordered such that an early compatible
pick later blocks a mandatory pick, the claim becomes Unschedulable and
standard retry behavior applies. This matches how existing DRA constraints
behave.

**Composition with `DeviceConstraints`.** `compatibilityGroups` is a
driver-authored, ResourceSlice-side constraint. `DeviceConstraints` (e.g.,
`matchAttribute`) is a user-authored, ResourceClaim-side constraint. The two
are evaluated independently and both must pass for a candidate to be
allocated. A claim can never *relax* a driver-declared compatibility group,
and a driver can never *force* a claim-side `matchAttribute`. They compose by
conjunction.

### Driver Responsibilities

Resource drivers are responsible for:

1. Populating `compatibilityGroups` for all devices with compatibility requirements.
2. Ensuring compatibility rules are symmetric and consistent across all devices
  in a ResourceSlice.

> 3. Documenting their compatibility matrix.

Reviewer: Documenting how and where?

Author: Documenting in their own product documentation sources.
With this feature enabled, drivers might not have to be manually configured to support one partitioning scheme or the other.
I see now that it is not really a requirement, but a recommendation to driver authors, and might not be relevant here

> 4. Continuing to validate at resource preparation time for version-skew safety.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Continuing to validate at resource preparation time for version-skew safety
    and to detect incorrect allocations made by a scheduler.
```

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to  
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary  
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

None. The DRA scheduler plugin and `ResourceSlice` validation already have
unit and integration coverage; new tests are additive.

##### Unit tests

- `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/structured`: pairwise group-intersection
  predicate (empty, nil, single, multiple groups; nil-vs-nil, nil-vs-set,

>   set-vs-set; `[]` treated as nil).

Reviewer: I think you can ignore `nil-vs-set` here if the code is obviously written so that it makes no difference. But it also doesn't hurt to verify, even if in real usage there never will be an empty list.

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/dynamicresources`: filter
  behavior with mixed compatible and incompatible candidates on the same
  counter set; no-op behavior when the feature gate is disabled; no-op
  behavior when no device in the slice declares the field.
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/apis/resource/validation`: field validation —
  accepted shapes, max group-name length, max groups per counter consumption.

##### Integration tests

- Feature gate enablement/disablement round-trip: field is persisted when

>   enabled, dropped on write when disabled.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/test/integration/dra/core.go#L161 - maybe link to it here already?

- Scheduler rejects a claim when the only remaining candidate on a node
  belongs to an incompatible group; admits it when a compatible candidate
  exists on another node.
- Upgrade → downgrade → upgrade: allocations made during the "upgrade" phase
  remain valid after downgrade; re-enabling enforcement does not re-evaluate

>   existing allocations.

Reviewer: => https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1f77090cd12d05c462e2e180b4f8becc12735728/test/e2e_dra/upgradedowngrade_test.go#L234-L287

##### e2e tests

- Fake DRA driver advertising two mutually exclusive groups (`mig`, `mps`) on
  a single counter set. Scheduling a `mig` pod followed by an `mps` pod on
  the same node leaves the second pod Unschedulable with the documented
  event; reversing the order reproduces the behavior symmetrically.
- Same driver with compatible groups (`foo`, `bar`) — both pods schedule.
- Feature-gate-off baseline: the second pod reaches preparation and the

>   driver rejects it (pre-KEP behavior preserved).

Reviewer: I think you can leave out this "Feature-gate-off baseline" case. We don't have a good way to specify that an E2E test may only run when a feature is off and what this would test would be the driver, not the scheduler.

### Graduation Criteria
#### Alpha
- API defined and implemented
- All relevant code is merged and placed behind a feature flag
- Unit and integration tests
- Driver-author documentation published under `kubernetes/website` (DRA
  drivers section), including the strict nil-matching rule and a worked
  MIG/MPS example.

#### Beta

> - E2E tests passing in CI 

Reviewer: If alpha has E2E tests, then they also must be passing reliably. This item then becomes more like "E2E tests implemented and passing reliably".

I prefer to have E2E tests already at alpha. At the end of the day, that is what gives us the confidence that the full flow really works. Noticing that only when some DRA driver authors tries out the alpha feature in a released 1.37.0 is too late: we cannot backport fixes.

- Validated with at least one production DRA driver (out-of-tree testing)

#### GA
- At least 2 releases as beta

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
#### Upgrade

> Upon upgrading, no `ResourceSlice` leverages the new optional fields yet, so the current behavior remains as-is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon upgrading, no `ResourceSlice` leverages the new optional fields yet because DRA drivers should updated after the cluster upgrade is complete, so the current behavior remains as-is.
In the unlikely case of a DRA driver trying to use the feature while it's still being rolled out (enabled in apiserver,
disabled in scheduler), the scheduler >= 1.37 will ignore the devices instead of doing incorrect
allocations. They will get used as soon as the feature gets enabled also in the scheduler.
```

#### Downgrade

> If downgrading to a version that does not have this enhancement implemented, older schedulers and api-servers do not know of the added optional field, and revert to their defined behavior prior to this enhancement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If downgrading to a version that does not have this enhancement implemented, older schedulers and api-servers do not know of the added optional field, and revert to their defined behavior prior to this enhancement when the current version is the initial alpha.
When downgrading to the alpha release in 1.37, the scheduler will refuse to allocate devices
which depend on the feature. Eventually, the downgraded DRA driver will remove those
devices.
```

No, this KEP proposes an additional optional field to the `ResourceSlice` API

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?
Yes, rolling back the enablement will revert the cluster to its pre-enablement behavior

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?
Existing `compatibilityGroup` configurations in `ResourceSlice`s will become effective again

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?
Yes, there will be integration tests to verify feature enablement/disablement

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?
Rollout risk is limited to the two components touched by the feature gate
(kube-apiserver field handling and kube-scheduler filter logic).
Already-running workloads are not affected: compatibility filtering only runs
during scheduling of *new* allocations, so disabling the gate or rolling back
binaries does not disturb existing pod/device bindings.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?
A new scheduler metric

> `scheduler_dra_compatibility_rejections_total{driver,counter_set,reason}`

Reviewer: This might not be technically feasible.

Scheduling cycles that involve DRA devices incur an additional
O(*N* · *M* · *G*) group-intersection check per counter set (see Design
Details → Scheduler Changes), where *M* is devices already allocated on that
counter set, *N* is candidates considered, and *G* is groups per device. For
realistic values (*M* ≤ 16, *N* ≤ 64, *G* ≤ 4) the added work is in the low
thousands of string comparisons per counter set per cycle and is not expected
to be measurable against existing DRA scheduling cost. Benchmarks will be run
during alpha and reported in the Implementation History.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?
No

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?
No

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?
No new side effects

###### What are other known failure modes?
N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?
TBD

## Implementation History

- 2026-03-17: KEP opened, status `provisional`.

> - 2026-04-18: KEP under review; API shape and default semantics settled.

Reviewer: I think it's sufficient to say here: "1.37 - initial alpha implementation".

It's not "history" yet, but let's assume that it'll happen to avoid having to update the KEP just for this.

incompatible allocations are attempted—is insufficient because it provides no
mechanism to inform the scheduler, and does not prevent repeated failed attempts.

### Goals

- Allow DRA drivers to specify compatibility between virtual devices within a
single physical device.
- Allow the scheduler to make informed allocation decisions that respect
compatibility rules declared in ResourceSlice objects.
- Provide a generic mechanism applicable to any hardware with partitioning
constraints, not just GPUs.
- Maintain backward compatibility with existing ResourceSlice specifications.

### Non-Goals

- Allow DRA drivers to specify compatibility between physical or virtual devices
across different physical devices or different device classes. The scope of
compatibility constraints is limited to virtual devices sharing the same
underlying physical device.

## Proposal

**CompatibilityGroups Assignment**

Add a `device.consumesCounters[].compatibilityGroups` field. Devices declare which  
named groups they belong to. For two devices consuming counters from the same  
counter set to be co-allocated, they must share at least one compatibility group.  

> Devices without this field are considered compatible with all groups. This  

Author: Hi @rajatchopra, thanks for the input!

My worry is that if the default is anything other than "compatible with all devices", this will introduce API breakage.
Meaning that when upgrading to a k8s version with this change, and the default is not "compatible with all devices", all devices will become bricked until their DRA drivers are upgraded to a version that is aware of this change and define compatibility groups for them.

What I do think I can improve here is to explicitly state that devices without `compatibilityGroups` are only compatible with other devices without `compatibilityGroups` (since the constraint is bi-directional and transitive).

I will update this section

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
spec:
  sharedCounters:
    - name: gpu-1-cs
      counters:
        multiprocessors:
          value: "152"
  devices:
    - name: gpu-1-mig1
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-1-cs
          compatibilityGroups:
            - mig
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "2"
    - name: gpu-1-foo-part
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-1-cs
          compatibilityGroups:
            - foo
            - bar
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "17"
    - name: gpu-1-bar-part
      consumesCounters:
        - counterSet: gpu-1-cs
          compatibilityGroups:
            - foo
            - bar
          counters:
            multiprocessors:
              value: "17"
```

- `gpu-1-mig1` and `gpu-1-foo-part` share no compatibility group (`mig` vs
`foo`/`bar`), so they cannot be co-allocated on the same counter set.
- `gpu-1-foo-part` and `gpu-1-bar-part` share compatibility groups (`foo`, `bar`),  
so they can be co-allocated on the same counter set.

### Scheduler Changes

> The DRA scheduler plugin is enhanced to:

Author: I'd have to look more closely on the plugin implementation to understand that.

My understanding is that the scheduler:
1. sums up all allocated requests to infer the current resource utilization (counterSets)
2. then iterates over all available devices that match the request (by driver name or CEL expression), and attempts to allocate them one-by-one until it finds a valid allocation.

My thinking was to extend that logic to create a set of `compatibilityGroups` in step 1, and then filter out devices that do not specify a `compatibilityGroup` within the set.

Do you see how defining `compatibilityGroups` ahead of time can simplify this process? Or do you have a different process in mind?

> The DRA scheduler plugin is enhanced to:

Reviewer 3: Currently the allocator constructs available counters for a counterSet while scheduling, so we can build the compatibility groups already used at the same time. Then checking if the intersection of groups already used and new groups requested is empty let us know if the device is valid.

Going through allocated devices is already there so I don't think step 1 is needed. https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/structured/internal/experimental/allocator_experimental.go#L1616

Given that the compatibility relation is symmetric, why is a bidirectional check needed?

> The DRA scheduler plugin is enhanced to:

Author: > Currently the allocator constructs available counters for a counterSet while scheduling, so we can build the compatibility groups already used at the same time. Then checking if the intersection of groups already used and new groups requested is empty let us know if the device is valid.
Going through allocated devices is already there so I don't think step 1 is needed. https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/structured/internal/experimental/allocator_experimental.go#L1616

@troychiu This is actually what I did in my POC implementation.

> Given that the compatibility relation is symmetric, why is a bidirectional check needed?

I worded it this way prior to me working on the POC implementation and became familiar with the plugin, so I see it as an implementation detail.

I will rephrase it accordingly.

- (R) Production readiness review completed
- (R) Production readiness review approved
- "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website](https://git.k8s.io/website), for publication to [kubernetes.io](https://kubernetes.io/)
- Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

This KEP proposes an extension to the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) API to
support mutually exclusive device allocation constraints. Hardware devices often
support multiple partitioning or virtualization schemes (for example, GPU MIG
slicing vs. MPS sharing) that provide different trade-offs in terms of isolation,
performance, and resource sharing. These schemes are frequently mutually exclusive
at the hardware level: once a physical device is partitioned or configured using
one scheme, it cannot be reconfigured to use a different scheme until all existing
allocations are released.

The current DRA Partitionable Devices API has no mechanism for drivers to express

> these mutual exclusivity constraints. Without it, incompatible allocations are only

Reviewer: This states "no mechanism" as a fact, but it's not clear from the summary why it's not possible. That's the first question anyone reading this will have (I did!), so let's answer it.

```suggestion
these mutual exclusivity constraints. A shared counter with a capacity of one
can ensure mutual exclusion, but this cannot be used here: such a counter
would have to be decremented once when allocating the *first* device from a set
of compatible devices, not once for *each* device. This cannot be expressed
at the moment.

Without a mechanism for this, incompatible allocations are only
```

Author: Thanks @pohly!
That is a great point. I accepted the suggestion
